[Music]
okay welcome everyone to a new episode
of myth-busting
this week we're gonna be looking at the
idea that the knees shouldn't go past
the toes in the squat because it's
improper technique or more likely to
cause injury to the knees um so this
idea is pretty common in personal
training circles and I think it's one of
those bits of dogma that have just
gotten handed down over time without any
real thoughtful consideration of the
scientific literature I think the idea
probably originates from a 1972 study
which found that of the 12 study
subjects the subject that the greatest
forward knee movement also had the
greatest sheer force on the tibia
femoral joint so the joint that connects
the tibia the big shin bone to the femur
the big bone of the upper leg and sheer
force in this context just refers to a
pair of opposing forces as to say one
force that pushes the tibia forward and
another that pulls the femur back and if
these shearing forces get too high it
can result in knee pain and if taken to
the extreme ACL tears or other injuries
now much more recent literature has
taken a hard line against this dataset
for not controlling for squat depth and
not including a description of the squat
technique they use now leading to the
speculation that perhaps the shearing
forces were due to a very upright
posture um so with that preliminary
paper aside I'd like to say that first
and probably most common sensical II I
think the knees can clearly go past the
toes without causing issues for example
when you go down the stairs your knees
clearly go past your toes but this
hardly ever causes pain in healthy knees
also in sports like Olympic
weightlifting you'll very often see very
extreme angles of knee flexion with the
knees way out past the toes and while
injuries certainly do occur many of
these athletes don't experience any knee
issues but anecdotes aside the main
point that I'd raise here is that we
shouldn't base technique guidelines for
multi-joint movements I like the squat
by only considering the forces involved
at one joint in this case the knee joint
while ignoring the forces at other
joints involved in the exercise so say
like the hip or the low back um so in
2003 fryin colleagues compared knee
and hip torques in two variations of the
squat one where their knees were
permitted to travel past their toes and
the other where a wooden board prevented
the knees from moving past the toes the
squat was taken to parallel in both
cases and as expected knee torque was
greater when the knees traveled further
forward so in the unrestricted squat
um so there was a difference of 150
Newton meters in the normal squat versus
117 Newton meters in the restricted
squat but just look at the difference in
hip torque between these two techniques
there's only 28 and the normal squat
that 302 and the restricted squat that's
more than a 10 fold difference in hip
torque just by keeping the knees back
and this finding led the authors to
suggest that it is appropriate to permit
forward displacement of the knees past
the toes during this exercise to permit
proper positioning of the torso
obviously this forward displacement must
not be excessive but instead should be
carefully regulated so basically as you
can see in the image forcing the knees
to stay back will force lifters to lean
further forward increasing strain on the
hips and low back so to me this seems
like a bit of an unreasonable trade-off
a slight reduction in knee to work for a
massive increase in the potential for
shear forces at the lower back and this
idea is supported by data from lists and
colleagues suggesting that there's less
stress on the lower back during an
unrestricted squat than during a
restricted squat and practitioners
shouldn't be overly strict with athletes
or clients in coaching against anterior
knee displacement during performance of
the squat um so to make this a little
more actionable I think a good squat
meets a few main criteria and the knees
not going past the toes isn't one of
them first the heels must stay firmly
planted on the ground a moderate forward
knee travel is okay as long as you
aren't shifting your weight up onto your
toes
second the weight on the bar must stay
centered over the middle of the foot
this means that when you're looking at
the squat from side on the bar should
travel up and down in a perfectly
straight line and thirdly your knees
should generally point in the same
direction as your toes they shouldn't
cave in or be forced out excessively
except for in some advanced cases so
these are the main principles and I
would say the rest of the technique
details as ice
it will depend on your body's
proportions which is determined mainly
by your skeleton that you really can't
do anything about so how much forward
lean you'll have in the squat will rely
largely on your femur length especially
relative to your tibia and you'll
necessarily have more forward lean if
you have longer femurs your skeleton can
also strongly affect how deep you can go
and how deep you should go on the squat
and I think rather than endorsing
across-the-board ask to grass squat the
approach I recommend is to go as deep as
you comfortably can but the goal of
trying to reach I guess at least
parallel as this sort of minimum
standard for strength and size goals but
I'll digress there and I'll wrap it up
here by saying that the idea that your
knees shouldn't go past your toes in the
squat is busted I will note that this
doesn't apply to all exercises so in the
lunge for example I think you really
should try to limit that forward knee
travel because you can maintain a much
more easily upright position in that
exercise meaning that trade-off between
the knees and the hips isn't quite there
in the same way and of course my
recommendations here are meant to apply
to healthy active regularly exercising
folks so if you are already experiencing
knee pain and I think you'll want to get
the counsel of an actual expert for that
but for now I think I want to wrap that
one up here many of you guys will know
that I've made it a goal of mine to
really increase my own strength on the
squat and the other to power lifts as a
part of my new plan for the rest of this
year and I am a fan of using proper
training equipment so if you guys are
looking to get a new belt or maybe some
knee sleeves to not only keep everything
tight and safe but also just help you
lift more weight you can check out the
stuff that my sponsor Rhys has to offer
I'll have a link down there in the
description to some of their stuff if
you'd like to check it out and the
equipment that I'm using in my own
training and this is a way that you can
support me and take your training to the
next level without any real downside or
drawback other than price so I'll leave
that up to you guys to decide so anyway
thank you guys so much for watching
I hope you liked the video if you did
enjoy it or if you learned something I
don't
to leave me a like don't forget to hit
the subscribe button if you're new to
the channel and I'll see you guys all
here next Monday